A Shortcut to the Siddhi of Immortality
Guru Yoga of Union with the Three Deities of Long Life
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo guru tri-ayurdevebhyaḥ!1
If you wish to attain immortality by practising the yoga of the lama and the three deities of
long life, begin by taking refuge and arousing bodhicitta with renunciation and bodhicitta
in mind. Then, meditate as follows.
om shunyata jana benza sobhawa atmako hang
oṃ śūnyatājñāna vajra-svabhāv-ātmako ‘ham
nöchü tamché mimik ösal ngang
In the natural state of clear light, without reference to anything in the universe or any being,
zungjuk ting ngé dzin gyi namrol lé
The display of the samādhi of union
chinö dakpé shyingkham dewachen
Manifests the beautiful pure universe of the buddhafield of Great Bliss and its beings,
yitrok ngotsar köpé dzepé shyir
Ravishing and perfectly arranged.
rangnyi tamal salwé chiwo ru
I appear in my ordinary form, vivid and clear.
püntsok chötrin gyatso trikpé ü
Above my head, amidst a profusion of most excellent offerings,
pekar da teng tsawé lama ni
My root guru sits on a white lotus and a moon,
nampa tsé dang yeshe chok tsol chir
In the form the Bhagavatī, Sublime Wish-fulfilling Wheel
chomden pakma yishyin khorlö tsul
So I may receive supreme long life and wisdom.
drimé dawa norbü tsenpé la
The colour of stainless crystal, endowed with the marks and signs,
rabshyi gyé nyi langtsö tsar dukchen
She has the serene, youthful beauty of a sixteen-year-old.
shyal chik chak nyi chen sum chak shyab kyi
With one face with three eyes,
til shyir yeshe chen ré tsenpa té
Her four wisdom eyes mark the palms of her two hands and the soles of her two feet,
changchub yenlak dün gyi zikpé dzé
Indicating that she can see the seven causes of enlightenment.
chak yé chok jin dzokden trin chen lé
Her right hand forms the mudrā of supreme giving, conjuring great clouds
pen dang dewé ngö kün char du beb
From which everything that brings well-being and joy rains down – as it did in the Golden Age.
yönpé dü sum deshyin shek tsönpé
Her left hand indicates that she is the embodiment of the victorious ones of the three times,
utpal nampé sishyi jikpa trok
And holds an utpala flower that takes away all fear of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
darkar töyok marpö shamtab dang
She looks beautiful in a blouse of white silk, a red skirt
norbu rinchen natsok gyen gyi tré
And adorned with many jewels, as she sits in vajra posture
dawar gyab ten dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
With the moon as her backrest.

dé yi chiwor rikdak tsepakmé
Above her head is the lord of the lotus family, Amitāyus Infinite Life,
kar mar dangchen nyam shyak tsebum dzin
Brilliant white, tinged with red, his hands, in meditation mudrā, hold a long-life vase.
tsenpé palbar dar dang rinchen gyen
Blazing with the glory of the marks and signs, wearing the silk and jewel ornaments.
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung pé dar rol
Joyfully, he sits on a lotus and a moon, his two legs in vajra posture.

tsuktor lé kyé ö kyi pungpö ü
Born from his uṣṇīṣa, the Sublime Victorious Lady, Uṣṇīṣavijayā,
pakma nampar gyalma tön dé dok
Appears amidst dazzling light. She is the colour of an autumn moon,
kar ser ngowé shyal sum chak gyé ma
With three faces – white, yellow and blue – and eight arms;
shyal rer rabtu gyepé chen sum dzé
Each face has three eyes, beaming with pleasure.
chak yé dangpö natsok dorjé dang
Her first right hand holds a vajra of various colours,
nyipé pekar la né öpakmé
The second a white lotus on which Amitāyus sits,
sumpé da dang shyipé chok jin dzé
The third an arrow, and the fourth forms the mudrā of supreme giving.
yön gyi dangpö dorjé shyakpa dang
Her first left hand holds a vajra noose,
nyipé shyu dang sumpé kyab jin gya
The second a bow, the third forms the mudrā of granting refuge,
shyipé nyam shyak dütsi bumpa nam
And the fourth forms the meditation mudrā and holds a vase of nectar.
dar dang rinchen gyen dzok kyiltrung shyuk
Wearing all the silk and jewel ornaments, she sits in full lotus.

nam sum ku yi chashé tamché né
Every part of each of the three deities’ bodies shines brightly,
özer trengwa pakyé chok chur tro
Sending infinite rays of light throughout the ten directions.
dedak reré tser yangdakpé shying
At the tip of each ray appear infinite pure buddha fields –
rabjam dul gyi drang nyé nangwa na
In number equal to the atoms in the universe –
lama yidam sangye changchub sem
Where all the lamas, yidams, buddhas, bodhisattvas,
tsé la wangwé rigdzin drangsong dang
Vidyādharas, rishis with power of over life,
chösung norlhé tsok kün trin tar tib
Dharma protectors and wealth deities assemble in an immense, cloud-like gathering.
kün kyang nangtong gyutrul drawé kü
They all appear, yet are empty – kāyas of the magical net.
né sum yigé sum gyi tsenpa lé
The three places of each deity are marked with the three syllables,
ö trö yeshe sempa chendrang tim
Which radiate light to invite the wisdom beings, who dissolve into the samayasattvas,
kyabné tamché düpé ngowor gyur
Now their nature is such that they embody all sources of refuge.

If you want to practice more elaborately you can add a detailed seven branch offering, offer
prostrations, and offer as many maṇḍalas as you wish. If you want to do a short practice,
say,
gang gi sosor tokpé yeshe ni
To you who are the wisdom of discernment,
drenpé chimé chok tsol tsé yi lhar
To the deity of long life who grants supreme immortality to those who think of you,
yong shar kyabné kündü lama la
The manifest form of the lama who is the embodiment of all refuge,
miché nying né güpé chaktsal lo
I prostrate with whole-hearted devotion.

jikten drenpé tsowo tsepakmé
Buddha of Infinite Life, foremost guide of beings in this world,
dümin chiwa malü jompé pal
Your glory overcomes all untimely death,
gönmé dukngal gyurpa nam kyi kyab
You are a refuge for those of us who suffer without protection—
sangye tsepakmé la chaktsal lo
To you, Buddha Amitāyus, I prostrate!

palden lhamo tönké dawé dok
Glorious goddess, the colour of the autumn moon,
shyal sum chak gyé rab dzé shyi mé ku
Graced with the most beautiful, peaceful body, three faces and eight arms,
yeshe pakyé tsé yi chok tsol ma
You who bestow primordial wisdom and infinite life,
nampar gyalmé shyab la chaktsal lo
Uṣṇīṣavijayā, at your feet I bow!

dak gi tserab ngön né drubpé lha
The deity I accomplished lifetimes ago,
dü sum sangye kün gyi trinlé ma
Embodiment of the activities of all the buddhas of the three times,
rab kar shyal chik chak nyi chen dün ma
Pure white, with one face, two hands and seven eyes,
yum gyur utpal nam la chaktsal lo
Mother who holds an utpala flower, I pay homage to you!

shyenyang chok chü gyalwa sé ché dang
All the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions,
tsé la wangwé drangsong rigpa dzin
All the rishis and vidyādharas with power over life,
chösung norlha gyatsö tsok ché la
And the oceans of Dharma protectors and wealth deities,
rabtu dangwé yi kyi chaktsal lo
I prostrate to you with the purest motivation!

ngöjor yitrul chötrin gyatsö chö
Here are vast quantities of real and imagined offerings.
diktung kün shak gé la jé yi rang
I confess all my negative actions and faults, and rejoice in virtue,
chökhor kor shyin kal gyar shyuk soldeb
Please remain here, continuously turning the wheel of dharma wheel for hundreds of kalpas, I
pray;
di tsön gé tsok changchub nyingpor ngo
All virtue illustrated by these six offerings, I dedicate to the heart of enlightenment.
Repeat this prayer three times.
detar chaktsal chö ching soltab tü
Through the power of my prostrations, offerings and prayers,
dak dang tayé semchen tamché kün
Bless me and all sentient beings.
kyé shying kyewar daljor ten tob ching
May we obtain the support of a precious human body lifetime after lifetime
namdak shé dang jalwar jingyi lob
And meet pure spiritual friends.

tsul né tö sam gompé parol sön
Bless us so we may perfect discipline, hearing, reflection and meditation,
ngejung changchub sem nyi tingné jong
Master renunciation and the two bodhicittas fully,
lab chen gyalsé chö la wanggyur né
Accomplish the vast conduct of the victorious’ heirs,
rangshyen dön nyi drubpar jingyi lob
And so act for the benefit of ourselves and others.

khyepar nedön dikdrib nyertsé sok
In particular, pacify all negative circumstances that impede dharma practice,
damchö drubpé galkyen kün shyi shying
Such as sickness, negative influences, negative karma, obscurations, harm and so on.
tsé sö paljor lungtok yeshe dang
Grant your blessings so that our lives are lengthened, our merit, wealth, wisdom of knowledge
and realisation of the teachings increase,
pendé getsen gyepar jingyi lob
And our capacity to benefit and bring happiness expands.
om taré tuttaré turé mama ayur punyé jnana pushting kuru soha
oṃ tāre tuttāre ture mama āyur puṇya jñāna puṣṭiṃ kuru svāhā
Recite this mantra. Then say,
tsechik nyenpé solwa tabpé tü
Through the power of reciting this prayer with all concentration,
lama yishyin khorlö tukka né
Light streams from the heart of the lama, Wish-fulfilling Wheel,
ö trö rikdak tsepakmé pa dang
From the lord of the lotus family, Amitāyus
dé yi tsuktor norbü özer gyi
And the jewel on his uṣṇīṣa,
pakma nampar gyalmé tukgyü kul
Rays of light invoke sublime, victorious Uṣṇīṣavijayā’s wisdom mind.

kün kyang tukjé jukpa lhakpar yö
A strong desire to accomplish compassionate activities flares up in all the deities
pakyé özer chok chü shying künkhyab
And they radiate infinite rays of light that fill all the worlds of the ten directions,
dak gi la tsé chenyam yarpa dang
Gathering my interrupted, corrupted and scattered la-vitality and length of life,2
jung shyi dangchü khordé tamché kyi
The quintessence of the four elements
tsé sö paljor yeshe yönten kün
And all the longevity, merit, wealth, wisdom and qualities
özer na ngé nampar chendrang né
Of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa fill the vase
rik kyi dakpö chak gi bumpar tim
Held by Amitāyus in the form of five-coloured light.
dütsi gyün lü dé dang lhenchik tu
A shower of the sweet nectar of immortality
tsok shying kün gyi ku yi chashé lé
Rains down from the continuously overflowing vase
chimé drubpé zil ngar char tar bab
And from every part of the deities’ bodies – the field of accumulation.
rang gi chiwo tsangpé goné shyuk
The nectar flows into my body through the crown of my head,
lü kyi nang gang nedön dikdrib jang
Filling me completely and eliminating all sickness, negative influences, negative karma and
obscurations.
la tsé chenyam yarpa rang sorchü
Any interruption, corruption or scattering of our la-vitality and life is naturally restored,
tsé sö paljor lungtok yönten gyé
Long life, merit, wealth, and the qualities of knowledge of the teachings and realisation grow,
chimé nyukmé gopang tobpar gyur
And I attain the level of original immortality.
om amarani dziwenti yé soha
oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā
Recite this mantra as many times as you can and in addition, recite the appropriate number of
the dhāraṇī of long life, the long, medium and short dhāraṇīs of Uṣṇīṣavijayā, and White
Tārā’s essence mantra. Conclude the session with,
tsok shying tamché ö shyu rang la tim
All the deities of the field of accumulation melt into light and dissolve into me.
rang gi go sum nyukmé yeshe dang
In the natural state of original primordial wisdom,
kyabyul nam kyi sang sum yermé ngang
My three doors indivisible from the three secrets of the objects of refuge,
neluk ösal chökü rang shyal ta
I look into the face of the dharmakāya, the fundamental nature of clear light.
Rest in the meaning of these words. When you rise from that meditation, say:
gewa di yi dak sok semchen kün
Through this merit, may my life and the lives of all sentient beings
tsé dir tsering nemé damchö den
Be long, free from illness, and graced with the dharma.
chima dewachen gyi shying kyé né
In the next life, may we be born in the buddhafield of Great Bliss
tsepakmé gön gopang nyur tob shok
And quickly attain the realisation of the protector Infinite Life.
Say this and other prayers of dedication, aspiration and auspiciousness, then resume your ordinary
activities. Between sessions, always prostrate to and circumambulate supports containing
relics and ringsels, read sūtras, make tsatsas, offer water tormas and so on. In other
words, strive to accomplish virtuous activities.
If you apply yourself to this practice wholeheartedly, all the illnesses, negative influences,
negative karma, obscurations that afflict you will be pacified, and your life, merit and
intelligence will flourish. Your practice will bring you these and other benefits beyond
measure. After you die, you will be reborn in the buddhafield of Great Bliss, where you will
quickly receive the prophecy of your enlightenment – of this there is no doubt!
This prayer is another of the lama’s blessings.Like the nectar that opens utpala flowers,May
the quintessence of the profound meaning Bring all sentient beings the siddhi of immortality!

This prayer was written by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo. Maṅgalam bhavatu.3

| Translated by Gyurme Avertin and edited by Janine Schulz, 2021.

Sources: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "tshe lha rnam gsum la brten pa'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor 'chi
med grub pa'i gseng lam/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols.
Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 22: 279–285
tshe lha rnam gsum la brten pa'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor 'chi med grub pa'i gser lam" in mkhyen
brtse'i dbang po, blo gter dbang po. sgrub thabs kun btus. BDRC W23681. 14 vols. Kangra, H.P.:
Indo-Tibetan Buddhist Literature Publisher, Dzongsar Inst. for Advanced Studies, null.
Vol. 12: 661–665

Version: 1.2-20211229
↑ The Sanskrit translates as: Homage to the Guru and Three Deities of Long Life!↑ The teachings
identify three factors that contribute to keeping us alive: 1) our longevity (tshe), which
is a force or energy that we gain at birth as the result of our previous karma; when
it is “interrupted” by incidental factors, such as an accident or illness, we die; 2) our
life-force (srog), which is the life energy that every sentient being possesses and is responsible
for health and a general sense of well-being; when it is “corrupted” by illness or
spirits, death will follow; and 3) the la-vitality (bla), which is located in the heart
and is responsible for our sense of identification with the body; if it is “scattered” or
leaves the body, death will soon follow.↑ The Sanskrit expression means “May it be auspicious!”