Extemporary Practice of Longevity for Oneself or Others
by Mipham Rinpoche

As an extemporary practice of longevity for yourself or others, visualise for yourself or the
object of focus:
chiwor chomdendé tsé pak tu mepa karpo longkü chechen chak nyamshyak gi tsebum nampa la
At the crown is the Bhagavan Amitayūs, white, with the saṃbhogakāya accoutrements, and with
his hands in the gesture of equanimity, holding a long-life vase.
Devotedly recite his name and pray to him. Recite the long-life dhāraṇī1 one hundred thousand
times, as a result of which:
tukké ö kyi khordé kyi tsechü dütsi özer karpö nampar dü
Light from his heart collects the vital essence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, which appears concentrated
in the form of white elixir that emits rays of light.
chak gi tsebum du babpa gang té lüpa mik jé chitsuk né shyukpé lü gang tsa lung tiklé tsé nyampa
sö
This elixir fills the long-life vase in his hands, then overflows and enters the crown of the
object of focus, filling their entire body and restoring any loss of vitality in the channels,
wind-energies or essences.
tsé pel shying trakdang denpar gyur
Longevity is thereby extended and the lustre of health restored.
Then, by reciting the amaraṇi mantra seven times:
dütsi gyün gyi nyikmé lü jang dorjé kur gyurpar gyur
The flow of elixir purifies the tainted body and transforms it into a vajra form.
Recite the verse that begins, "Through the strength of the six perfections…" As a result:
tsepakmé dütsi nampar shyu
Amitāyus melts into the elixir,
mik jé chitsuk né timpé chimé dorjé tsé tobpar gyur
And dissolves into the object of focus at the crown, so that they attain immortal vajra longevity.
With this in mind, recite the dhāraṇī once.
Recite the verses of auspiciousness beginning, "May the wishes and aims of the patrons and their
associates…
dé tsé yi gek shyi shying tsé shintu ringpor tsowar gyur ro
This will pacify hindrances and bring about an exceedingly long life.

Jampal Dorje wrote this according to the intent of the tantras on the first day of the fifth
month of the Water Dragon year.2

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Sources:
mi pham rgya mtsho. "rang gzhan gyi glo bur tshe sgrub/." In gsung 'bum/_mi pham rgya mtsho.
Chengdu: [gangs can rig gzhung dpe rnying myur skyobs lhan tshogs], 2007. (BDRC W2DB16631).
Vol. 29: 73–74.
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rang gzhan gyi blo [sic] bur tshe sgrub/" in 'Jam dbyangs chos
kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol. 7:
581–582

Version: 1.0-20220113
↑ i.e., the dhāraṇī of Amitāyus. See https://www.lotsawahouse.org/words-of-the-buddha/amitayus-dharani↑
25 June 1892