How to Recite the Dhāraṇīsūtra of Amitāyus
by Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö

Gurvaparimitāya!
If you wish to recite the dhāraṇīsūtra of Amitāyus, begin by taking refuge and generating bodhicitta
as briefly or elaborately as you prefer.
Then, purify everything into emptiness with the svabhāva-mantra:
om sobhava shuddho sarva dharma sobhava shuddho hang
oṃ svabhāva śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva śuddho ‘haṃ
tongpé ngang lé kechik gi
Out of emptiness, instantly,
neyul dewachen gyi shying
The whole environment becomes the pureland of Sukhāvatī.
pema dawé den tengdu
Upon a lotus and moon-disc seat,
rangnyi hrih lé tsepakmé
From the syllable hrīḥ I appear as Amitāyus,
marpo shyal chik chak nyipa
Red in colour, with one face and two hands.
nyamshyak tsé yi bumpa nam
Resting in meditative equipoise, he holds the long-life vase.
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi dzé
He is adorned with silks and jewelled ornaments and
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
Seated in the cross-legged vajra posture.
né sum om ah hung gi tsen
His three places are marked by the syllables oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ.
tukkar da teng hrih mar tar
In his heart upon a moon disc is the red syllable hrīḥ
zung kyi ngak kyi trengwé kor
Surrounded by the dhāraṇī-mantra-mālā.
dé lé ngak treng drar ché trö
From it spontaneously resounding mantra-mālās stream forth
dakshyen lé nyön dribpa jang
To purify the veils of my own and others’ karma and afflictions.
khordé tsechü dangma nam
The clear elixir of the vitality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
tukké ngak kyi trengwa dang
Dissolves into the mantra-mālā in his heart and
chak gi tsé yi bumpar tim
The vase of longevity in his hands.
chimé yeshe dütsi gyün
A stream of deathless wisdom amṛta
babpé rangshyen lü kheng shing
Falls upon me and others, completely filling our bodies
tsesö yeshe gyepar gyur
And causing our lifespan, merit and wisdom to increase.
Recite these lines, and if you wish to direct the practice toward a particular person, imagine
him or her sitting well-dressed and resplendent in front of you.
Then, while maintaining the visualization, recite the entire dhāraṇīsūtra as many times as possible.
Afterwards recite the dhāraṇī of long life on its own as many times as possible and
conclude by reciting the hundred-syllable mantra three times. Next recite:
chomdendé dak dang semchen tamché la chimé tsé dang yeshe kyi ngödrub tsal du sol
O Bhagavat, please grant me and all other sentient beings the siddhi of deathless life and wisdom!
Recite this followed by:
den pé da ö du shyu né rang la tim
The lotus and moon-disc seat transform into light which dissolves into me.
rang gi né sum om ah hung gyi tsenpar gyur
And I imagine that my three places are marked by oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ.

gewa di yi dak sok semchen kün
Through this merit may I and all sentient beings
tsé dir tsering nemé damchö den
Enjoy, in this very lifetime, longevity and good health, and may we never be separated from
the Dharma.
chima dewachen gyi shying kyé né
In the next life, may we take birth within the pureland of Sukhāvatī,
tsepakmé gön gopang nyur tob shok
And may we swiftly attain the level of the protector Amitāyus.
Thus dedicate the merit and make aspirations.
jinpé tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
Through the strength of generosity, the Buddha is perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé jinpé tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized generosity’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
jinpa tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May my life-span further increase, so that I can perfect generosity.

tsultrim tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
Through the strength of discipline, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé tsultrim tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized discipline’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
tsultrim tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May my life-span further increase, so that I can perfect discipline.

zöpé tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
Through the strength of patience, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé zöpé tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized patience’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
zöpa tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May my life-span further increase, so that I can perfect patience.

tsöndrü tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
Through the strength of diligence, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé tsultrim tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized diligence’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
tsöndrü tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May my life-span further increase, so that I can perfect diligence.

samten tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
Through the strength of meditation, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé samten tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized meditation’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
samten tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May my life-span further increase, so that I can perfect meditation.

sherab tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
Through the strength of wisdom, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé sherab tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized wisdom’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
sherab tarchin tsé yang pelwar shok
May my life-span further increase, so that I can perfect wisdom.
Thus recite the prayer of auspiciousness.

Composed, out of necessity, by Chökyi Lodrö.

| Translated by Stefan Mang, 2019. (The final prayer of auspiciousness beginning with “jinpé
tob kyi” was translated by Adam Pearcey.)

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "tshe dpag med kyi gzungs mdo bklag thabs/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 7: 539–541

Version: 2.0-20220127