The Dhāraṇī of Amitāyus
from the Words of the Buddha

jikten drenpé tsowo tsepakmé
Buddha of Infinite Life, foremost guide for beings in this world,
dü min chiwa malü jompé pal
Your glory overcomes all untimely death,
gönmé dukngal gyurpa nam kyi kyab
You are a refuge for those of us who suffer without protection—
sangye tsepakmé la chak tsal lo
To you, Buddha Amitāyus, I pay homage!1
om namo bhagawate | aparimita ayurjnana subinischita tejo rajaya | tathagataya arhate samyaksambuddhaya
| tadyatha om punye punye maha punye | aparimita punye aparimita punya jnana sambharo
pachite | om sarva samskara parishuddha dharmate gagana samudgate svabhava vishuddhe
mahanaya parivare svaha |
oṃ namo bhagavate aparimitāyur-jñāna-suviniścita-tejo-rājāya tathāgatāya arhate samyak saṃbuddhāya
| tadyathā | oṃ puṇye puṇye mahā-puṇye 'parimita-puṇye 'parimita-puṇya-jñāna-saṃbhāropacite
| oṃ sarva-saṃskāra-pariśuddhe dharmate gagana-samudgate svabhāva-viśuddhe mahā-naya-parivāre
svāhā |

jinpé tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
“Through the strength of generosity, the Buddha is perfectly sublime.
mi yi sengé jinpé tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized generosity’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
jinpé tob kyi dra ni drakpar gyur
The sound of the strength of generosity is heard.

tsultrim tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
“Through the strength of discipline, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé tsultrim tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized discipline’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
tsultrim tob kyi dra ni drakpar gyur
The sound of the strength of discipline is heard.

zöpé tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
“Through the strength of patience, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé zöpé tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized patience’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
zöpé tob kyi dra ni drakpar gyur
The sound of the strength of patience is heard.

tsöndrü tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
“Through the strength of diligence, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé tsöndrü tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized diligence’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
tsöndrü tob kyi dra ni drakpar gyur
The sound of the strength of diligence is heard.

samten tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
“Through the strength of meditation, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé samten tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized meditation’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
samten tob kyi dra ni drakpar gyur
The sound of the strength of meditation is heard.

sherab tob kyi sangye yangdak pak
“Through the strength of wisdom, the Buddha is perfectly sublime,
mi yi sengé sherab tob tok té
A lion among men, he has realized wisdom’s strength.
nyingjé chen gyi drongkhyer jukpa na
When entering the citadel of the compassionate ones,
sherab tob kyi dra ni drakpar gyur
The sound of the strength of wisdom is heard.”

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2007, revised 2022.

Version: 2.0-20220127
↑ The author of this popular four-line praise is yet to be identified.